#Project Proposal
####My proposal for the Digital History Initiative is a website database of crowdsourced folktales primarily to facilitate interdisciplinary cooperation between anthropologists, sociologists, and other academics for whom access to more iterations of folktales would improve the scope and quality of their work. It also enables students in a variety of humanities disciplines to engage with a wide variety of first hand oral deliveries of folk-tales with personal or local significance. The goal is for this site to facilitate analysis of folktales both individually and through comparative methodology, with less of a need for the extensive field work and the ability the build off the work of previous scholars. It is based on the comparative folk-tale work such as Vladimir Propp’s The Russian Folktale (1989) or Johannes Th. Kakridis’ Homeric Researches (1949), which make good use of a number of folktales collected across a large range of regions and cultures, but which were still limited to the dataset collected personally by themselves or their collaborators.

####The site will allow users to post the oral accounts they recorded as well as an explanation of the context, observations on any separating elements between it and similar versions of the tale, and comments on how the tale touches on larger themes. It will also provide a way to connect the various versions as part of a larger tale type, such as the various versions of the ogre tale in Eric Csapo’s Theories of Mythology. The posting process will also involve placing tags related to the content of the folktale, such as motifs, elements, and themes that will assist searches and connecting the tale with others that contain the same tags. To further incentivize academics to contribute their recorded accounts, as well as connect the entries to examinations of their significance, they will also be able to place references with their posts to their other work on the subject so other students and scholars researching the folktale can be directed towards their works.

####Due to the nature of the initiative as a grant for a project, and the fact that a website of this nature could be theoretically maintained for as long as there is funding to maintain it, I have two alternative long-term goals for the site. The first option, which is preferable, is that after the three year period, which should provide enough time to establish the site as a useful source for the study of folktales, the funding for the maintenance of the site will be made up from partnerships with universities with large interest in folktale study and/or donations from participants. This would enable the study of folktales to continue to grow after the scope of the project is complete, and allow the site to be a useful tool in the various fields that utilize oral transmissions of folktales. The alternative is that after the three year period of crowdsourcing as many folktales as possible, the site can be converted into a kind of digital journal to be stored by academic institutions and used later.

####The first digital history method that will be utilized for this project is web design using HTML and CSS, as the effectiveness of the site will be dependant on the quality of the interface and the visual build of the site. Another method that will be utilized is the building of javascript functions which will dynamically alter and build the page based on the inputs of the user. Finally, the Oral History techniques will be relevant to building a page which incorporates an audio file with text to present a full range of information. The nature of the project is such that the content of the website is not framed and organized by the developers of the site, and thus we must insure the processes by which the site takes the audio and given information and forms a page, as well as the process by which those pages are connected to others with the same tags or under the same tale or tale type, are effective as presenting the information with very little necessary work from the user.

####My method for creating the site is to first develop the site itself, using the digital history techniques discussed previously and a team of 2 other web developers and coders. Much of the work after the building the site’s infrastructure will be to establish a starting database of accounts, and than build off this to establish it as a useful source among academics both to contribute to and utilize in their own work. The way I intend to do this is to find the work of academics who have already done or are doing field work to collect oral accounts of folk-tales, to provide the first collection of posts that will enable us to demonstrate the utility of the site and build a base of participation with it. The non-commercial nature of the site will make this part of the process easier, as bringing academics on board and utilizing their work is much easier for an academic site rather than commercial one. The long-term success of the site will be dependant on how it can help reinvigorate the study of folktales which has fallen out of popularity in the past few years, and the best way to do this is to attract academics in relevant disciplines from a wide range of regions.

####This brings up another key difficulty that we must overcome, which is that unless the site reaches out to people of varying regions, its utility will suffer greatly. If our site only acquired audio accounts from studies of Canadian Aboriginal oral tales, for example, the sites usefulness will be limited as it would only provide examples from a range that is reasonable for an academic to reach out to anyways. This is where utilizing website translation software for localization, as well as reaching out to universities internationally will be important, otherwise our site will be locked to a limited set of languages.

####This raises another problem on the development side, which is how to deal with the very diverse set of languages that would be required for this project. The best solution for this would be a mix of a translation software, a transcription software, and the encouragement for the user to provide a transcript. This is because although a transcription software combined with a translator could provide a solution, it is not ideal as running the original audio through two these two conversions would likely corrupt much of the original meaning, but without these softwares the alternatives would be to force every user to transcribe their submitted audio or retain team members to transcribe and translate the various languages. This solution would also alleviate the problem of valuing specific languages over others, which is important as key insights into the development of important folk-tales to specific cultures makes up a considerable portion of the utility of folk-tale analysis.

####We must also deal with the difficulty raised by the open nature of the site, as both malicious and mistaken actions from users can make it difficult to use the site for its primary function. Moderating content can deal with this problem to a reasonable degree, as there is not an overabundance of content that would be too much for a human moderator. It is important, however, that in moderating the content, we keep the scope of what fits the purpose of the website broad, as what we may not consider a relevant “folktale” may have use in a way we can’t anticipate, and so our efforts to moderate the content on our site should be limited to only the most irrelevant or problematic content.

####The timeline for the project will begin with a 12 week development cycle for the websites primary infrastructure, calculated based on the average web development time factoring in a small but designated team working to develop it. Within this time, we will also be reaching out to academics who have studied folktales to begin to set the stage for early participation. The goal for the first year is to have collected a reasonably large archive of multiple folktale types with multiple iterations for each. Using the work of Propp as a benchmark, we will ideally have a range of versions of the folktale types that he utilized for his hero folktales, as an example, so that the site will serve its primary function as a useful central source for a large number of folktales. The goal for the second year will be to try and integrate the site as best as possible into anthropology and sociology courses and promote the site as a useful tool to study oral accounts.

####The third year will be centred on trying to securing long term funding through partnership with universities, donations, or a combination of the two. This period is where the long term nature of the site, as either a continuing platform for research collaboration in folktales or a static collection of folktales to be preserved and utilized for study. The success of this depends largely on how well the site is integrated in both the work of anthropologists and the ability of professors to use it as part of their course work. If within about four months of the deadline, funding for the continued maintenance of the site is not secured, focus shifts from securing the longevity of the site to consolidating the entries collected into a usable format and disseminating it for academic use.

####The importance of this use is demonstrated by both the strengths and weaknesses of the field work done by scholars like Propp and Kakridis. To use Kakridis’ work on ogre tales to demonstrate this point, he was able to collect a pool of oral tales following the same story structure as the Polyphemus episode in Homer’s Odyssey, in order to place the epic work as part of a larger tradition of folktales and tracing its regional developments through a comparative analysis of the appearance of certain elements in the different versions. The scope of his examination was limited, however, by the range in which he could physically travel and the resources he could use to travel. Supplementing their own acquired accounts with a wider range of sources obtained from the site would help produce a more complete examination, provide  their examination with more regional diversity, and vastly expand the scope of the potential historical implications of their findings.

####The other importance of this project is that it opens the field of examination of orally transmitted folktales to a large section of academics without the resources to undertake the kind of field work that is necessary to gather a large enough collection of tales for effective anthropological or historical comparative analysis. The nature of examining these folktales is such that more remote and local versions are key to fully understanding their development and transmission, which makes the most impactful analysis out of reach for many. Even accounts which have already been documented can only be found in a haphazard collection across various works with no real connection or organization except those drawn by the original researchers. The site thus provides a tool that gives more people access to folktales for analysis and centralizes them into a source that streamlines the process of finding these sources.

####The by-product of enabling a more effective study of folktales is that the site will jumpstart a reemergence of it as an academic practice. Comparative folktale analysis as a field has not advanced far beyond the work of Propp and his contemporaries, and this likely has to do with the relative lack of new techniques or tools that would allow more recent scholars to add to the conversation. This site would create the conditions for a collaborative effort that would enable new perspectives on folktales and their historical significance to enter the academic sphere, utilizing access to primary sources they did not have before.
